Okay, okay, I hear you. There are no more file archives! Fine! Let’s explore one more use of John that comes up semi-frequently in CTF challenges—using John to crack the SSH private key password of `id_rsa` files. Unless configured otherwise, you authenticate your SSH login using a password. However, you can configure key-based authentication, which lets you use your private key, `id_rsa`, as an authentication key to log in to a remote machine over SSH. However, doing so will often require a password to access the private key; here, we will be using John to crack this password to allow authentication over SSH using the key.

## SSH2John

Who could have guessed it, another conversion tool? Well, that’s what working with John is all about. As the name suggests, `ssh2john` converts the `id_rsa` private key, which is used to log in to the SSH session, into a hash format that John can work with. Jokes aside, it’s another beautiful example of John’s versatility. The syntax is about what you’d expect. Note that if you don’t have `ssh2john` installed, you can use `ssh2john.py`, located in the `/opt/john/ssh2john.py`. If you’re doing this on the AttackBox, replace the `ssh2john` command with `python3 /opt/john/ssh2john.py` or on Kali, `python /usr/share/john/ssh2john.py`.

`ssh2john [id_rsa private key file] > [output file]`

- `ssh2john`: Invokes the `ssh2john` tool
- `[id_rsa private key file]`: The path to the id_rsa file you wish to get the hash of
- `>`: This is the output director. We’re using it to redirect the output from this command to another file.
- `[output file]`: This is the file that will store the output from

**Example Usage**

`/opt/john/ssh2john.py id_rsa > id_rsa_hash.txt`

## Cracking

For the final time, we’re feeding the file we output from ssh2john, which in our example use case is called `id_rsa_hash.txt` and, as we did with `rar2john`, we can use this seamlessly with John:

`john --wordlist=/usr/share/wordlists/rockyou.txt id_rsa_hash.txt`