Hold your horses!

Before even going to the actual thing, let's have a quick overview of the thought process when using CyberChef! This process consists of four different steps:

![This image illustrates the thought process when using CyberChef. The first box includes setting a clear objective and answering the question What do you want to achieve? The second box includes the steps you can do with your data. The third box includes which operations you might want to use. This can be a little bit tricky if you are not familiar with the data that you have. However, there are plenty of operations that we can choose from. The last box includes determining if the output is the desired one. If not, it states to repeat the process from the first box](https://tryhackme-images.s3.amazonaws.com/user-uploads/5e6bbe59a46ee9407fd65bbe/room-content/5e6bbe59a46ee9407fd65bbe-1726735685403.png)

Let's discuss each step further.

Setting a clear objective is essential. This step involves defining specific and achievable goals. It helps answer the question, "**What do I want to accomplish?**". Objectives are vital in providing direction, purpose, and focus to your goals. One example would be, "During a security investigation, I found a gibberish string; I want to know what hidden message it contains if it has one."

Next, put your data into the input area. In this step, you use your data. This is where you paste or upload the gibberish string that you found.

The third step is to select the **Operations** you want to use. This can be tricky if you are not familiar yet with what you are dealing with. Following our example, we are still determining what to use to understand this gibberish string. During our research, we found relevant information that this gibberish string might be using anything related to encryption. Therefore, we decided to use any operations under the **Encryption/Encoding** category, including but not limited to `ROT13`, `Base64`, `Base85`, or `ROT47`. Note that we can use a lot of operations under this category. 

Lastly, check the output to see if it is the intended result. This begs the question, "**Have we achieved our objective?**". In our example, it would mean, were we able to decode the gibberish string we found? If yes, then that's it! If not, we may need to repeat the steps that we have taken.

To provide visual clarity to our example, see the figure below:

![This image illustrates a more detailed thought process by including actual samples. The first box mentions that a gibberish string was found during a security incident. And we need to determine what the hidden message is. Next, we put the strings in our input area. Third, we need to determine which operations we can use through research and find any information that might be relevant. In our case, we discovered relevant information that encryption might be used, and we decided to use any operations under the Encryption/Encoding category. The last box asks if we could decode the hidden message; if not, we must repeat the process.](https://tryhackme-images.s3.amazonaws.com/user-uploads/5f9c7574e201fe31dad228fc/room-content/5f9c7574e201fe31dad228fc-1729242272295.png)