Integrity checking in digital forensics imaging is crucial for ensuring that the forensic copy of data is identical to the original. This process uses cryptographic hash functions, such as MD5, SHA-1, or SHA-256, to generate unique hash values for both the original and the copied data. By comparing these hash values, investigators can confirm that the evidence was not altered during the imaging process, maintaining its reliability and admissibility in legal proceedings.

Methods for integrity checking include using tools that automatically calculate and verify hashes during the imaging process. Tools like `dc3dd`  generate and compare hash values in real-time, providing an added layer of assurance. Regular integrity checks throughout the investigation ensure that data remains unchanged, preserving the chain of custody.

Let's again list the block devices on our system using the command `lsblk` with `-l` to list the devices.

Example Terminal

```shell-session
user@tryhackme$ sudo lsblk -l
loop0    7:0    0  26.7M  1 loop /snap/amazon-ssm-agent/5163
loop1    7:1    0  24.9M  1 loop /snap/amazon-ssm-agent/7628
loop2    7:2    0 105.4M  1 loop /snap/core/16574
loop3    7:3    0 104.2M  1 loop /snap/core/17200
loop4    7:4    0  55.7M  1 loop /snap/core18/2812
loop5    7:5    0  55.7M  1 loop /snap/core18/2829
loop6    7:6    0  63.9M  1 loop /snap/core20/2105
loop7    7:7    0    64M  1 loop /snap/core20/2318
loop8    7:8    0  67.9M  1 loop /snap/lxd/22526
loop9    7:9    0  91.9M  1 loop /snap/lxd/24061
loop10   7:10   0   1.1G  0 loop 
loop11   7:11   0   1.1G  0 loop /mnt/example1
xvda   202:0    0    40G  0 disk 
xvda1  202:1    0    40G  0 part /
```

We can observe that the device is still listed in `/dev/loop10`. Let's ensure our imaging process was successful. To do that, let's calculate the MD5 hash of the image we created, `example1.img`, and let's do the same for the device`/dev/loop10`. The results should match.  

Example Terminal

```shell-session
user@tryhackme$ sudo md5sum example1.img 
483ca14c7524b8667974a922662b87e8  example1.img

user@tryhackme$ sudo md5sum /dev/loop10
483ca14c7524b8667974a922662b87e8  /dev/loop10
```

As shown above, the calculated hash indeed matches, passing the integrity check for this image we created. Thus, we can confirm that the imaging process has been successful through hashing.