Aren't you curious about what precisely within the rule was matched? Well, I am!

In this task, we will seek to determine the reason for triggering the rules and the conditions involved. We will use the parameter -vv  or **very verbose** to achieve this.
Option	Description	Sample Syntax
-v or --verbose	enable verbose result document	capa.exe -v .\cryptbot.bin 
-vv or --vverbose	enable very verbose result document)	capa.exe -vv .\cryptbot.bin 


Let's run it!

Terminal
PS C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\capa> capa -vv .\cryptbot.bin
loading : 100%|████████████████████| 485/485 [00:00<00:00, 1108.84     rules/s]
/ analyzing program...
This will give us more detailed results; however, this will take a lot of time. We already processed this and named the file cryptbot_vv.txt in "C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\capa". Remember, you don't need to wait for the tool to finish running; we did this so that you can get a feel for running the tool and experiment with its parameters.

Open another PowerShell terminal and look inside the file using the command Get-Content cryptbot_vv.txt.

Terminal
PS C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\capa> Get-Content .\cryptbot_vv.txt
So, have you opened the file? Do you have more than three thousand lines similar to this one?

Accessing this vast amount of information using a terminal or a text editor will be challenging.

To analyze this result with ease, we need to do two things. First, we will use the parameter -j and -vv, and direct the result to a .json file. The command would be capa.bin -j -vv .\cryptbot.bin > cryptbot_vv.json

.
Terminal
PS C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\capa> capa.bin -j -vv .\cryptbot.bin > cryptbot_vv.json
loading : 100%|████████████████████| 485/485 [00:00<00:00, 1108.84     rules/s]
/ analyzing program...
Again, this will take a lot of time, similar to the previous commands we run. We have processed this and created a file named  cryptbot_vv.json located in "C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\capa".  Additionally, we've attached the file to this task. Remember, you don't need to wait for the tool to finish running; we did this so that you can get a feel for running the tool and experiment with its parameters. 

We can start with our next step.



CAPA Web Explorer

The second thing we need to do is upload the file to CAPA Explorer Web. We can either use their online version here on this link, or the offline version already in the virtual machine. There is a Google Chrome browser on the desktop named capa_web_explorer_offline.html. Alternatively, you can access this using a regular Chrome browser bookmark. Note that the local page may take up to a minute to load in Chrome on the target machine.



Now, we should have access to the homepage! 



Look for the button Upload from local located at the bottom left of the page and select the file cryptbot_vv.json in C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\capa. Once uploaded, you should have a similar output. 



Doesn't this look good and easier to use? I bet it is!



Now, it's time to explore this excellent addition to the tool. We'll review some capabilities and check what precisely within the rule was matched. This will give us a better idea of how the rule works.

Let's go through our first example below. We know that the capability was to reference anti-VM strings targeting VMWare, and the corresponding rule config file or yaml file is anti-VM-Strings-targeting-VMWare.yml. Notice the box from the image.



 Then, let us show you an overview of the rule's content. Focus on the features as CAPA uses the succeeding strings below to check if strings are within the analyzed file. 

View Rule
Did you see it? That's right! Under the features, the "string: /VMWare/i" is being referenced by CAPA Web Explorer. Simply, CAPA is saying that under this namespace, we could identify strings with a value of VMWare by using the conditions within the rule and with regex.


Let's have another sample.  We know that the capability was to reference the scheduled task via schtasks, and the corresponding rule was to schedule the task via schtasks.yml. Notice the box from the image.



The same applies to our first example; we will show you the rule's content overview. Focus on the features, as CAPA uses the succeeding strings below to check if there are strings within the file being analyzed.
Terminal
rule:
  meta:
    name: schedule task via schtasks
    namespace: persistence/scheduled-tasks
    authors:
      - 0x534a@mailbox.org
    scopes:
      static: function
      dynamic: thread
    att&ck:
      - Persistence::Scheduled Task/Job::Scheduled Task [T1053.005]
    examples:
      - 79cde1aa711e321b4939805d27e160be:0x401440
  features:
    - and:
      - match: host-interaction/process/create
      - or:
        - and:
          - string: /schtasks/i
          - string: /\/create /i
        - string: /Register-ScheduledTask /i
Under the feature, the "string: /schtasks/i and /\/create /i" is referenced by CAPA Web Explorer. Simply, CAPA is saying under this namespace, and by using the conditions within the rule and with regex, we could identify strings with a value of schtasks and create. 


Global Search Box
Another cool feature of this tool is its filter options and the Global Search box, which are very helpful.




We could quickly examine this overwhelming information using CAPA Web Explorer compared to any text editor. 