Cross-site scripting (XSS) remains one of the common vulnerabilities that threaten web applications to this day. XSS attacks rely on injecting a malicious script in a benign website to run on a user’s browser. In other words, XSS attacks exploit the user’s trust in the vulnerable web application, hence the damage.

One of the earliest XSS vulnerabilities was recognized in 1999 and led to CERT advisory [CA-2000-02](https://vuls.cert.org/confluence/display/historical/CERT+Advisory+CA-2000-02+Malicious+HTML+Tags+Embedded+in+Client+Web+Requests). Over the past decades, various robust web security practices have become part of modern web application frameworks, protecting against many XSS vulnerabilities by default. On the other hand, the motives and sophistication of the attacks have also grown.

With the rise of web applications, it is no exaggeration that a few XSS vulnerabilities are discovered and exploited every month. In the [OWASP Top 10](https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/), XSS was ranked seventh in 2017. In 2021’s report, XSS was grouped with other injection attacks and together are ranked third.

This room explores XSS in depth to help you discover, exploit, and patch XSS vulnerabilities.

## Room Prerequisites

It’s expected to have basic knowledge of HTTP and how websites work. If you don’t have this knowledge, we recommend completing the [How the Web Works](https://tryhackme.com/module/how-the-web-works) module first.

If you are unfamiliar with XSS, we highly recommend completing the [Intro to Cross-site Scripting](https://tryhackme.com/room/xss) room as this room builds on it.

Finally, this room uses code snippets in PHP, JavaScript, Python, and C-Sharp. Knowledge of all these programming languages is not required. Instead, we explain the necessary code lines and focus on the causes and remedies of XSS vulnerabilities.