One of the security principles is Defense-in-Depth. Hence, we should always think in terms of layers of security. One of the first layers is physical security.

It would be best if you prevented potential adversaries from being able to gain physical access to your computer systems. If an intruder can gain physical access to your office, it would be easy to remove the disk drive and take it away. That’s a simple attack that requires minimal technical skills.

Let’s say you have taken the necessary measures to prevent intruders from taking the disk drive or the whole computer system. Moreover, you have ensured that your system passwords are complex and impossible to guess. If an intruder can access the system physically, it is a non-sophisticated task to use GRUB, a popular Linux bootloader, to reset the root password account. Hence we have the adage “boot access = root access”.

It is evident that we need to ensure physical security for our computer systems; however, in the unlikely event that physical security is breached, we need to provide additional layers of protection. Many BIOS and UEFI firmware allows you to add a boot password. This password will prevent unauthorized users from booting the system. However, this can only be used for personal systems; it won’t make sense to use it on servers as this will require someone to be physically present to supply the boot password.

We can consider adding a GRUB password depending on the Linux system we want to protect. Many tools help achieve that. One tool is `grub2-mkpasswd-pbkdf2`, which prompts you to input your password twice and generates a hash for you. The resulting hash should be added to the appropriate configuration file depending on the Linux distribution (examples: [Fedora](https://docs.fedoraproject.org/en-US/fedora-coreos/grub-password/) and [Ubuntu](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Grub2/Passwords)). This configuration would prevent unauthorized users from resetting your root password. It will require the user to supply a password to access advanced boot configurations via GRUB, including logging in with root access.

AttackBox Terminal

```shell-session
root@AttackBox# grub2-mkpasswd-pbkdf2
Enter password: 
Reenter password: 
PBKDF2 hash of your password is grub.pbkdf2.sha512.10000.534B77859C13DCF094E90B926E26C586F5DC9D00687853487C4BB1500D57EC29E2D6D07A586262E093DCBDFF4B3552742A25700BAB6B76A8206B3BFCB273EEB4.4BA1447590EA8451CD224AA1C5F8623FE85D23F6D34E2026E3F08C5AA79282DB65B330BAB4944E9374EC51BF11EFF418EDA5D66FF4D7AAA86F662F793B92DA61
```

It is important to note that adding a password for GRUB is not available for systems deployed using cloud service providers (such as our Linux VM); a GRUB password does not make sense as you don’t have access to the physical terminal.

Ensuring proper physical security is a must considering how easy it is for an attacker with physical access to wreak havoc. Adding a password to GRUB is a reasonable measure to block users with physical access to a system’s keyboard from gaining access. However, we need a plan in case an attacker finds a way to steal the disk drives.
