Several different processes run on your computing devices, e.g., laptops, mobile phones, etc. Some of these processes are interactive, meaning you perform the actions, e.g., playing a game or watching a video. There will also be some non-interactive processes running in the background that may not require your interaction with them. They are just necessary for your device. Both of these types of processes generate several events. Anything they do, an event is logged for what they have done.

Events are generated in huge numbers regularly. This is because many processes run on a device, each performing different routine tasks, generating numerous events. These events can sometimes point to something terrible going on in your device. How do we check these vast numbers of events and see if they point to some destructive activity? There are security solutions in place to solve this problem. These events are ingested into the security solutions as logs, and the security solutions can find harmful activities in them. This made our job way more easier! But wait a minute; the real challenge is after the security solution points these activities out.

So, when a security solution finds an event or group of events associated with a possible harmful activity, it triggers an alert. The security team then analyzes these alerts. Some of these alerts may be **False Positives**, while some would be **True Positives**. The alerts that point to something dangerous but are not harmful are referred to as false positives. In contrast, the alerts that point to something harmful and are actually dangerous are called true positives. You can get a better understanding of this from the example below:

**False positive:** A security solution raised an alert on a high amount of data being transferred from one system to an external IP address. Upon analyzing this alert, the security team found that the subject system was undergoing a backup process to a cloud storage service, which caused this. This is known as a false positive.

**True Positive:** A security solution raised an alert on a phishing attempt on one of the organization’s users. Upon analyzing this alert, the security team found that the email was a phishing email sent to this user to compromise the system. This is known as a true positive.

These true positive alerts are sometimes referred to as **Incidents**. Assuming the alert is now categorized as an incident, the next phase is to give a severity level to the incident. Imagine you are part of the security team and get multiple incidents simultaneously. Which incident would you choose first to respond to? This is where the idea of incident severity helps. Incidents can be categorized as low, medium, high, or critical based on the impact they can create. Critical Severity incidents are always the higher priority, followed by high severity, and so on.