Every piece of software you install on your system also increases the number of potential vulnerabilities. In other words, installing additional software packages and new services increases the vulnerabilities an attacker can exploit to gain access to your system and, eventually, to other systems on your network. You can follow some guidelines to help you reduce the attack surface.

## Disable Unnecessary Services

One of the easiest ways to improve your security posture is by removing or disabling unneeded services and packages. In simple terms, we need to minimize the number of installed system packages as every package carries some risk, and we cannot know when a related vulnerability will be discovered. The best policy is to avoid installing unneeded packages.

For example, if you don’t need a web server, you should ensure you don’t install one. If you needed to run a web server at one point but no longer need it now, you should remove it or at least disable it. Otherwise, you will be exposing yourself to unnecessary risk.

## Block Unneeded Network Ports

After you remove any packages that are not required and disable preinstalled services that might not be removed, it is critical to set your firewall rules accordingly. If you don’t have a web server, there is no reason to allow packets to TCP ports 80 and 443. The reasoning behind this is that if the attacker manages to start a disabled service, the firewall will block its traffic, and the attacker won’t be able to access its TCP port(s).

## Avoid Legacy Protocols

At one point in the past, Telnet was the primary protocol to remote access a system; the TFTP protocol was commonly used to transfer files. Such protocols should no longer be allowed as secure alternatives have been released.

Instead of Telnet, the SSH protocol is now widely available. For example, the Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) protocol provides a great alternative to the TFTP protocol. The critical point is that a secure alternative is selected and used.

## Remove Identification Strings

Whenever you connect to a remote server, it usually replies with its version number. This information would reveal various information to the attacker, such as the name of the server/program, the version number, and the host operating system.