It is vital that you keep your system updated with the latest security patches and bug fixes.

You can update a Debian-based distribution, such as Ubuntu, with the following two commands:

1. `apt update` to download package information from the configured sources
2. `apt upgrade` to install available upgrades for all packages from the configured sources

You can update a RedHat or Fedora system using the following:

- `dnf update` on newer releases (Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8 and later)
- `yum update` on older releases (Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 and earlier)

Since we are talking about production systems, we need to select distributions that will continue to receive updates smoothly for many years.

## Ubuntu LTS Releases

For example, Ubuntu releases a Long Term Support (LTS) version every two years. LTS releases have an even version number (indicating the year) with 04 (for April), such as 18.04, 20.04, and 22.04. An LTS version will grant you five years of security updates for the base OS without a subscription and another five years if you pay for Extended Security Maintenance (ESM). For more information, you might want to check [The Ubuntu lifecycle and release cadence](https://ubuntu.com/about/release-cycle).

Using an Ubuntu LTS release, you can download updates without a subscription for the first five years. Consider the following Linux system with Ubuntu 14.04. It was released in 2014, and its free support ended in April 2019. In other words, free update service was available till 2019. In the terminal below, we see that there are 133 additional updates that we can download and install if we have an Ubuntu Pro (Infra-Only) subscription (previously known as Ubuntu Advantage (UA) for Infrastructure).

AttackBox Terminal

```shell-session
root@AttackBox# user@tryhackme$ uname -a
Linux ubuntu-14-vm 4.4.0-148-generic #174~14.04.1-Ubuntu SMP Thu May 9 08:18:11 UTC 2019 i686 athlon i686 GNU/Linux

user@tryhackme$ sudo apt upgrade
Reading package lists... Done
Building dependency tree       
Reading state information... Done
Calculating upgrade... Done
0 upgraded, 0 newly installed, 0 to remove and 0 not upgraded.

133 additional updates are available with UA Infrastructure ESM.
To see these additional updates run: apt list --upgradable
See https://ubuntu.com/advantage or run: sudo ua status
```

Ubuntu 14.04 was released more than five years ago; hence, free updates are no longer available. From the security point of view, the user should either get an Ubuntu Pro subscription or switch to a new LTS release, such as Ubuntu 22.04. Continuing to run a system that does not receive security updates exposes the system and the whole network to additional risk.

## RedHat Releases

RedHat Enterprise Linux 8 and 9 offer 12 years of support in three phases:

1. Full Support for five years
2. Maintenance Support for five years
3. Extended Life Phase for two years

For example, Red Hat Enterprise Linux 9 was released on May 18, 2022. It can benefit from updates as follows:

1. Full support till May 31, 2027
2. Maintenance support till May 31, 2032

For more details, check [Red Hat Enterprise Linux Life Cycle](https://access.redhat.com/support/policy/updates/errata/).

## Kernel Updates

Updating the system should not be limited to the installed software; it should consider updating the kernel. For instance, in 2016, a security vulnerability that affects the Linux kernel was discovered. It allows an attacker to gain root access to a system by exploiting a race condition in the copy-on-write (COW) mechanism, giving it the name “Dirty COW.” The vulnerability is present in all Linux kernel versions from 2.6.22 onwards. It has been patched in most major Linux distributions, but it is still a threat to systems that have not been updated.

Because Dirty COW is a severe vulnerability that can allow attackers to gain root access to Linux systems, it is crucial to keep your system, including its kernel, up-to-date with the latest security patches to reduce the risk of exploitation.

## Automatic Updates

Now that you have a Linux system with security updates throughout its life, we must ensure that the updates are properly installed, and security fixes are applied.

- Stay updated with security news in case of a vulnerability that affects your systems is disclosed.
- Depending on the Linux distribution that you are using, consider configuring automatic updates. Automating updates on Linux distributions that prioritize stability over cutting-edge technology would be safe.