In this task, we'll get our hands dirty. Let's dive right in!

Using the tools from our Flare virtual machine, we will analyze different executables, run them, and see what it does on a specific machine!

A suspicious windows.exe file was downloaded by a user on 09/24/2024 at 3:43 AM. This download was flagged as a potential threat. The monitoring team has sent you an email requesting to perform an analysis of it. They have sent you the file, which is now in the C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\Sample folder.

 this image shows the files that we are going to use in this task

Our initial approach for this investigation is to perform static analysis to get initial information from the binary. 


Analysis using PEStudio
Let's start with PEStudio. Open the file with this tool. What information can we use here?

this image shows static information about the windows.exe file when opened using PEStudio.
For the computed MD5 9FDD4767DE5AEC8E577C1916ECC3E1D6 and SHA-1 A1BC55A7931BFCD24651357829C460FD3DC4828F hashes, comparisons with established databases like VirusTotal are recommended. If there are no known detections, there's a greater chance that it's a fresh or undiscovered malware campaign.

Although the file claims to be connected to the Windows Registry Editor (REGEDIT), which you can see based on the description, this is likely an attempt to trick people and evade discovery.

Legitimate REGEDIT tools are usually found in the C:\Windows\System32 directory rather than the user's download location.

What else?

this image shows more result when the file windows.exe was opened using PEStudio.></p>

<p>If you look at the <b>version field</b>, it can be said that the presence of Russian text (Редактор реестра" - "Registry Editor", "Операционная система Microsoft® Windows®") in the file’s metadata is suspicious, primarily if the user or the organization does not operate in a Russian-speaking environment. This could potentially have profound implications for our organization.

The absence of a rich header  indicates that the file is potentially packed or obfuscated to avoid detection by static analysis tools. This is typical behaviour of sophisticated malware that tries to evade detection by altering critical sections of its PE file.

The function tabs list API calls that the file has imported. This is also known as the IAT (Import Address Table). By clicking on the blacklist tab, PeStudio will sort the API by moving all the blacklisted functions to the top. This is useful because it enables us to understand how malware may behave once it compromises a host. The image below shows what API has been imported.

 this image shows the API calls that windows.exe uses

Here are the important functions that we noted.

set_UseShellExecute: This function allows the process to use the operating system's shell to execute other processes. This is often seen in malware that spawns additional processes to carry out malicious actions.

CryptoStream, RijndaelManaged, CipherMode, CreateDecryptor: These APIs indicate that the executable uses cryptographic functions, specifically Rijndael (AES encryption). Malware may use cryptography to encrypt communication and files or even implement ransomware functionality.


Analysis using FLOSS
Open PowerShell and go to the directory where our file is, which is C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\Sample. Note that it might take a while before the PowerShell prompt appears. Run the command FLOSS.exe .\windows.exe > windows.txt. This will run the tool floss.exe and output it to a file named windows.txt in the same directory.

Terminal
PS C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\Sample > FLOSS.exe .\windows.exe > windows.txt
WARNING: floss: .NET language-specific string extraction is not supported yet
WARNING: floss: FLOSS does NOT attempt to deobfuscate any strings from .NET binaries
INFO: floss: disabled string deobfuscation
INFO: floss: extracting static strings
INFO: floss: finished execution after 0.34 seconds
INFO: floss: rendering results
Open the file and go to the bottom part of the result.

this image shows  the result when you run the tool floss.exe and output it on a file.

Aren't these familiar? These are the functions that we saw earlier using the PEStudio tool!

Analyze with Process Explorer and Process Monitor
In this example, we will analyze the network connectivity of the file cobaltstrike.exe located in C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\Sample.

We will try to figure out if the file is making any network connectivity to any possible c2 server.  Let's get started! Run the file cobaltstrike.exe and open Process Explorer on the desktop or from the taskbar. You can also search for it in the Windows search bar. If you manually click the binary Explorer.exe would be the parent process, and cobaltstrike.exe would be the child process. Let's see if that is indeed the case.

this image shows the processes related to cobaltstrike.exe
It is, as you can see from the screenshot above! Remember, this information is crucial, but let's focus on our goal to determine whether this process is making any network connectivity and to what destination. The process ID is 4756. Note that the Process ID might be different from your machine. Right-click on the process, select Properties and go to the TCP/IP tab. We should be able to determine the destination it connects to and the state it sends. 

This image actually has a lot of information about the cobaltstrike.exe. We can see the properties of the file here. We focused on the TCP/IP tab as this contains information about network connectivity.
There we have it! On another note, when we are doing analysis, it needs to be verified and precise. Therefore, we won't be relying on a single tool. We will use another tool to determine if the information is correct. Stop the process and rerun it. This time, we will use Procmon or Proces Monitor. This is also located on the desktop or in the taskbar.

When we open Procmon, looking for the binary is challenging as it will list all active processes. What we are going to do is filter it. The image below points to the filter icon. Or you can press CRTL + L.

this image shows how to use the filter for process monitor tool

Now, using this filter involves several steps. This includes:
Select the Process Name
Select contains
type any value containing any word related to the process. In this case, cobalt
Click include
And then Add and Click on Apply
You should be able to see the conditions added.
This image shows the steps you will use to filter the results of process monitor tool.

This should give us a more detailed result.

this image shows a filtered result concerning the cobaltstrike.exe binary.


This confirms that the binary was indeed making a connection to an unknown IP address which is 47.120.46.210.